{% include syllabus.md courseCode="10820" courseTitle="CISP 300: Algorithm Design/Problem Solving" courseDescription="This course introduces methods for solving typical computer problems through algorithm design. Topics include assessing and analyzing computer problems in a top-down, divide-and-conquer approach that leads to a programming solution. It also covers programming plans and detailed design documents from which source code versions of programs are created." courseSLO="* define operators, including arithmetic, comparison, and logical operators.\n* differentiate control structures, including branches (conditional statements) and loops (pre-checking and post-checking loops).\n* deduce post-condition from pre-condition for control structures, including assignment statements, branches, and loops.\n* construct a trace table to emulate the execution of a program that utilizes variables, various control structures, data organizations, subroutines, and parameters.\n* contrast the lifespan limits and behaviors of local variables, by-value parameters, and by-reference parameters.\n* compare the two methods of passing results: by-reference parameters and return value.\n* compare in-line copy-and-paste coding with structured subroutines in terms of maintainability, defect containment, testability, and other metrics.\n* create a subroutine to abstract one or more similar blocks of in-line code using local variables, parameters, and return values.\n* differentiate roles involved in software development, including developers, analysts, and test engineers.\n" classInfo="* Meetings: MW 0900-1020\n* Drop date: 2025/04/20\n* Units: 3\n"  semester="Spring 2025" topics="<table><thead><tr><th>topics</th><th>date</th></tr></thead><tr><td>The different roles involved in software development: systems analysts, developers, and test engineers.<br />Necessary training for programmers.<br />Special job requirements for programmers.<br />The definition of &quot;algorithm.&quot;<br />How algorithms relate to programmers.</td>  <td>01/22/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The definition of &quot;variable.&quot;<br />Assignment statements as a means to change the values of variables.<br />How to interpret assignment statements that have the same variable on both sides of the operator.<br />Sequences of assignment statements.<br />The technique to trace a sequence of assignment statements.</td>  <td>01/27/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Conditional statements using diagrams.<br />The behavior of conditional statements.<br />How to trace the execution of a conditional statement.</td>  <td>01/29/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Pre-checking loops using diagrams.<br />Post-checking loops using diagrams.<br />How to trace the execution of loop statements.</td>  <td>02/05/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The importance of structured programming.<br />The importance of indentation.<br />The behavior of a nested statement involving conditional statements and loops.<br />How to trace the execution of a nested statement.</td>  <td>02/17/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Pre-conditions and post-conditions.<br />How to compute the post-condition of an assignment statement that is not self-referencing.<br />How to compute the post-condition of an assignment statement that is self-referencing.<br />Post-conditions and algorithm validation.</td>  <td>02/24/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>How to compute the post-condition of a conditional statement.<br />How to compute the post-condition of a loop statement.<br />Loop invariant.</td>  <td>03/03/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The necessity of top-down design.<br />Top-down design using a complex algorithm.</td>  <td>03/10/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The limitations of algorithms without arrays.<br />The definition of &quot;array.&quot;<br />The definition of the indexing operator.<br />Simple algorithms using arrays.</td>  <td>03/19/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Short circuited Boolean expression evaluation.<br />Why short circuited Boolean expression evaluation is important.<br />How to emulate short circuited Boolean expression evaluation when it is not implemented by a programming language.</td>  <td>03/31/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>How to search in an array using a linear search algorithm.<br />How to search in an array using binary search.</td>  <td>04/02/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Subroutines.<br />How to trace the execution of subroutines.<br />How to trace recursive subroutines.</td>  <td>04/09/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The limitations of using global variables.<br />Local variables.<br />The lifespan of a local variable.<br />The importance of initializing a local variable.<br />How to represent a local variable in a trace.</td>  <td>04/14/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The main role of parameters.<br />By-value parameters.<br />How a by-value parameter relates to a local variable.<br />By-reference parameters.<br />How to represent parameters in a trace.</td>  <td>04/16/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>An alternative method to pass a single result from a subroutine.<br />Return statement.<br />The behavior of a return statement.<br />How to trace the execution of a subroutine that returns a value.</td>  <td>04/21/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The problems of copy-paste-and-modify.<br />How to reuse the same code at different places in an algorithm using subroutines.</td>  <td>04/28/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The importance of abstracting a segment of code into a subroutine.<br />How to classify variables used in an algorithm into local variables, by-value parameters and by-reference parameters.<br />How to track local variables and parameters in a trace.</td>  <td>04/30/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>The necessity of types.<br />How a type restricts the possible operations on a value.<br />How to designate the types of variables and parameters.</td>  <td>05/07/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>Record (structure) as a mechanism to bundle related variables.<br />How to access various parts of a record.<br />How a record can contain arrays.<br />How an array can contain records.</td>  <td>05/12/2025</td></tr> <tr><td>File concepts.<br />File open, read, write, and check for end-of-file operations.<br />Algorithms using file concepts.<br />How to trace algorithms using file operations.</td>  <td>05/14/2025</td></tr></table>" officeHour="* Office hours:\n  * MW: 0800-0900\n  * TR: 1400-1500\n  * F: 0800-0900" %}
